+++
title = "Albums of the Year (2022)"
author = ["peregrinator"]
date = 2023-02-27T23:28:00+05:30
draft = false
toc = false
+++

I dread publishing lists of this kind especially because ranking
things was never something I enjoyed and since I have a tendency to
forget artists and albums, often even those that I listen to
regularly. I also remember bands by sound and almost inevitably refuse
to keep track of when artists I like release new music. This is in no
sense complete nor could I get myself to write about each of the
albums - I'll perhaps get down to this sometime later. There is no
ranking within this list for the same reasons as before.

-   KEN mode - Null

Exasperated with everything good in life going to dogs? _Throw Your
Phone in the River_! It's noisy, ambient with an abundance of harsh
industrial sounds blended into the background, delivered with bleak,
sludgy instrumentation. This time they're a four piece, with the
addition of Kathryn Kerr bringing in the saxophone and it expectedly
sounds great with this brand of metal. This release also marks a
stylistic shift from their typically outright angry sound to this
tinge of despair in the way the vocals are delivered.

{{< bandcamp 3317743233 >}}

-   Primitive Man - Insurmountable

From practitioners of the most brutal form of Death/Sludge arguably
pioneered by them, the latest offering from Primitive Man bludgeons
the anxieties and dread that came with the pandemic into a
slow-burning, gloomy and angry 4 track record. Their sound appears to
have been perfected over the years into the combination of oppressive
mammoth-like riffs, a loud menacing bass, copious amounts of guitar
feedback and noise samples embedded into the background, and drums
with the hint of a twang on the snare leaving the listener in an
atmosphere dripping with tension and apprehension. McCarthy's vocals
are as wild as ever - there's undertones of the sludge scream, the
black metal snarl, alloyed with the Death-growl into guttural lows and
highs. This album also includes a cover of "Quiet" by the Smashing
Pumpkins.

{{< bandcamp 1938079692 >}}

Ethan McCarthy's other project - Vermin Womb - also saw a new release
that I'd also recommend. It's similar sounding in the instrumentation
and overall feel but has songs played in a more blackened and Grindcore
style.

{{< bandcamp 428389777 >}}

-   Drowse - Wane into It

{{< bandcamp 3404655629 >}}

-   Kathryn Mohr - Holly

Liminal perhaps describes the kind of music Kathryn Mohr makes
accurately and in a single word but it's got a lot more to it. I find
that listening to this album when I need to unwind makes the process a
lot easier and a great deal more enjoyable, but I'm inevitably left
craving more. _Holly_ has droney chords strummed on a Jazzmaster (?),
fuzzy and exclusively on neck pickups - and I feel like I shouldn't
have to describe this any further but I'll just add that it takes the
edge off the typical bright tone. This perfectly compliments haunting,
layered vocals that sometimes sound off-key. The vocals don't appear
to be too central to her sound and songs are often instrumental,
overlaid with pretty synth riffs and crucially set in a brown-noise
base. Also worth noting is the way tracks are arranged in the style of
a cassette release - both sides have short instrumental introductory
pieces and is available as a cassette on her Bandcamp!

{{< bandcamp 201745917 >}}

-   Mamaleek - Diner Coffee (?)

As the Flenser repeatedly tweets, **Who is Mamaleek?**. Weird noisey and
dark but it's really hard to describe them without sounding insane.

{{< bandcamp 798925787 >}}

-   Meshuggah - Immutable

I came to realise they had a new release out when I saw and absurd
"meme" video on Youtube. It's got the usual _sick_ groove but I could
have sworn a pronounced blackening to their riffs.

{{< youtube id="eX4GOltUDdA" title="Your Coworker hates Meshuggah" >}}

-   Chat Pile - God's Country

What hasn't been said about the Purple man that took the world by
storm with their debut album, under the Flenser label, no less. Heavy
guitars and skull numbing reverb laden drums thumping out slow and
dark songs about despair and the anti-anthem "Why". Needless to say,
I'm sold on the Purple Man.

{{< bandcamp 1845795607 >}}

-   Wormrot - Hiss

It's got everything a Wormrot album promises in grindcore, but this
release felt more mellow as compared to the brutally fast and precise
riffing/drums from earlier releases.

{{< bandcamp 4060129622 >}}

-   Exhumed - To The Dead

Morbidly groovy and detuned Death/Grind, often reminiscent of
Carcass's very old grindcore delivers human entrails yet again. 2022
has been a prolonged fangirling moment for Doktor Ross Sewage and
every [band he's played with](https://www.doktorsewage.com/about/). His twitter feed is never boring.

{{< bandcamp 544623389 >}}

-   Russian Circles - Gnosis

Post-metal but it often sounds black and heavy.

{{< bandcamp 2146782469 >}}

-   Wake - Thought Form Descent

There's no words I can conjure to describe Wake humanly. It's got
everything - sickeningly catchy riffs like grindcore, dark ambient
black metal and post-metal - but then there's so much more. It's loud
and hits you like a tidal wave but is also meditative of sorts.

{{< bandcamp 2062431084 >}}

-   Hath - All That Was Promised

Modern Death metal that is blackened and sometimes slightly
technical. There are mellow passages too but ultimately the album
feels not as abstract as older Death metal and betrays a sort of
sorrow.

{{< bandcamp 1846091399 >}}

-   Mares of Thrace - The Exile

This was easily one of the most tension filled, deathy Doom metal
records of my year.

{{< bandcamp 1897908051 >}}

-   Stormland - The Human Cost

{{< bandcamp 688215029 >}}

-   Heriot - Profound Mortality

Hard to

{{< bandcamp 3401809514 >}}

-   Hexis - Aeturnum

Unabashedly Satanic, these black metallers deliver the loudest and
fullest sounding black metal record I've heard in a while. The air is
heavy and icy but the vocals hit like a draft from a furnace.

{{< bandcamp 2425494646 >}}

-   Miscreance - Convergence

I came across them when the Dead Neanderthals tweeted

{{< tweet user="SanDiegoZoo" id="1620492647025758210" >}}

and I'm in full agreement. Being the dedicated Death fan (for life),
this does indeed sound like Chuck Schuldiner performed the
vocals. Both Pestilence and Death drips off their thrashy, bass-heavy
minor key riffs.

{{< bandcamp 2469012988 >}}

-   Scarcity - Aveilut

{{< bandcamp 620818614 >}}

-   Thou &amp; Mizmor - Myopia

{{< bandcamp 3344058140 >}}
