+++
title = "Sustainability and the Common Man"
author = ["peregrinator"]
date = 2017-03-20T10:43:00+05:30
draft = false
+++

Policy with respect to sustainability in India has never been top
priority, until very recently. It has often been fraught with people's
predispositions that should never have come about in the first
place. I will be talking about the ways of a singe man I know, let's
call him Devdas (original name withheld for various reasons) and how
almost all of his actions were made knowing about the state of
wildlife in India.

In my 21 years, one word that I've heard consistently in discussions
of any sort is _sustainability_. Due to its overuse, particularly very
frivolously, I must say over the years the word has lost its meaning
but the concepts have somehow become clearer (as a result of my own
digging and research). Being from a school with a rich biodiversity in
its very own campus, this isn't a very heartening thing to hear. What
I don't understand, however, is the fact that actually very few people
that I've interacted with in my latter 18 years get involved in either
the conservation of wildlife or the policy making it closely
associates with. This becomes clearer when one understands the latent
intrinsic characters of the people that run the school, albeit that is
a topic for an essay by itself. As I will write in most of my upcoming
papers, the fauna and flora of the Eastern Ghats has not received much
attention and the cause and outcome of this is seen in the people that
inhabit the region.


## Beginnings {#beginnings}

The person whom I will be talking about is from a rural region of the
Eastern Ghats, probably on the coast. His upbringing was in the medium
of the language spoken in that place and definitely excluded the hot
topics of biodiversity, conservation, and sustainability. Most of his
childhood was spent trying to find means of indulging in fun and
frolic without being discovered by (possibly) strict parents. The
parents would also have been quite unaware of such issues as they
would have been labouring to make ends meet. This person, like all
others in his village, wanted to come up in life and so he took up the
course of education that was necessary for the challenging exams one
was required to clear for a career in Chartered Accountancy. Usually a
well paid discipline, he had to settle for a not-so-high salary post
in a remote school. That was where I met him.  It might have been some
nine or ten years ago that Devdas first came to work in this
school. Since I was studying in that school, and during vacations
everyone staying back met frequently (not to mention knowing each
other fairly well) we saw each other very often. Devdas was a young
chap, maybe in his twenties then, fairly naïve (as was I: naïve, not
in my twenties!) and with a keen inferiority complex. His English was
not the best as a result of which he would interact only with a select
group of individuals, mainly those he though were “in his league”. He
was jovial in the sense that he wanted to lighten the generally
hostile environment that he lived in to make his time alone pass along
faster. Initially I talked to him a lot, and every time I went to his
spartan apartment, there would be eggs lying around in the kitchen and
a pile of old accountancy textbooks in a corner gathering dust. I
never knew how he passed his time because soon after I got a new
friends circle and he was not in it. I did still say the occasional
hello and what's up, but that was all.

---

Now I don't know what his life was like in truth in the few years that
I didn't meet him or talk to him. All I heard after this period, which
lasted nearly 8 or nine years, was rumours and more rumours, all of
which is completely irrelevant here. A change that I had seen was that
he had bought his own new motorbike and used it to travel even to the
place he worked that was barely 200 meters away from where he now
stayed. He had made several new friends and some that lived elsewhere
even stayed with him when they visited. However, certain other aspects
of his character, I could never understand, whether they were new
because I had not gotten to know him earlier. It is those that I will
be talking about here.


## An ode to plastics, the wonderful! {#an-ode-to-plastics-the-wonderful}

If asked to lecture on the science behind plastics, both Devdas and
Donald Trump would very likely say the very same things. On a trip to
the nearby village, as usual on his motorbike, we purchased a large
bag of _pakodas_ diligently wrapped in old newspaper, tied with
synthetic string and finally placed inside a black plastic bag. To
wash hands we got some plastic packets of water, a cheaper alternative
to buying the unnecessary plastic bottle (we didn't want to spend that
much money). Of course, I enjoyed eating this fast food, excessively
oily, salty and essentially the bane to human existence, as did
he. Now in his thirties, he continues to eat this junk and has the
nerve to talk about maintaining health! (That, I will write about
another time just for the sheer hilariousness.)  Well, we found an
isolated sheet rock that was easy to access, as the numerous broken
bottles of alcoholics indicated, we ate and finally when the time came
to dispose of (what I knew to be non-biodegradable) plastics and
paper, he did the most predictable thing. He got up and walked to his
motor bike. Of course, after tossing aside, with almost a certain
flair, the oily newspaper, the plastics and bits of leftovers. I
looked at him inquisitively and, finally realising subtlety was not
his forte, asked him why he had left the plastic there. He merely
waved me off and we left. I was not satisfied.  This happened again
soon after, and again, and again and again. Put simply this was what
would happen every time he went out. So eventually I confronted him
one day. His explanation was probably the most well thought out and,
as you shall see why, transformed the way I think entirely. I mean,
the way I think about him. Of course not the way I think about
plastics!

> _Biggibee_ [thats what he calls me, a corruption of Big-B], why you
> worry? This plastic and all will go in 2 or three years! Go to that
> place where they dump plastics. It will not be there in some years.

I say that it's because people collect it and dump it elsewhere and
that plastic is not biodegradable.

> No _yaar_! Not like that! I have seen! Plastic will go!

I remind him that cows and other animals including wildlife eat that
and die. After two minutes silence:

> No _yaar_. Nothing like that.

Well, I kept quiet since I realised how futile it might be to have an
argument about something he was so convinced about.

---

Half a year down the line, we still go out to eat, sit in the same
places and do the same things. I ask him about it once in a while but
don't press for a definite answer.


## If you're not a drinker, you still can have fun with bottles {#if-you-re-not-a-drinker-you-still-can-have-fun-with-bottles}

Even if we aren't eating anything he sometimes likes to just go to
these rocks which in the evenings and mornings are
undisturbed. Usually he parks his motorbike near these rocks and get
on with his work. Although the purpose of his going there is to
sunbathe or do some exercise on the road shoulder (I still don't
understand why he shows a preference for such a spot do do this), he
first scans the rocks for empty liquor bottles left behind by careless
drinkers. He goes over and picks them up giving an impression that he
might actually do the place a service. The very first thing heard is
the sound of glass shattering. Sometimes pieces of the shattered
bottle hit you, if you're close enough. Then one can hear the laughter
of satisfaction.  I once told him (sarcastically, but convincingly)
that glass is the same as sand in its chemical composition, expecting
him to be overjoyed but he was completely unconcerned. Just mildly
amused. He went about doing his social service, sometimes with a
little creativity: he would rest the bottle on the rock and fling a
stone the size of a clenched fist or even larger at it and watch in
satisfaction as the bottle fragmented. Another time he flung a small
hard bottle against a larger fragile bottle and merrily witnessed the
results. Even large pieces of glass upset him. He crushes those
underfoot.  I did try explaining to him that there are a lot of
animals that live near these rocks and that his breaking those bottles
does them anything but good. He shrugged this off as he did with the
case of plastics.


## The scam that is waste disposal {#the-scam-that-is-waste-disposal}

The school that we live in has, over the years, transformed waste
disposal into a systematic process wherein the separation of different
types of refuse is integral. It is very evident that without this,
piles of accumulating waste attract domestic pests, pollute the place
rather than anything else and on the whole make it extremely
unpleasant and hazardous to not only human but also other
life. Organic refuse can be composted, plastics and glass can be
reused and metal can be recycled. However:

> What _yaar Biggibee_! All these ********\********* ****\***** and ****\***** ****\*\***** [names withheld
> for various reasons] simply bought four-four new dustbins _yaar_.

His stock of old soft drink bottles (all plastic), soft drink
tetra-packs, plastic shopping bags, kitchen wastes (often including
packaging, plastic of course), and almost anything else is bundled
into a large polyethylene bag and dumped randomly into any one of the
four dustbins provided. Franky, at this stage, I'm not shocked or
anything.

---

His obsession for soft drinks is now a die hard habit. Purportedly,
soft drinks are far better than the drinking water provided here for
the reason that the water (as opposed to soft drinks such as _Coke_,
_Thums up_, _Appy Fizz_, etc) makes him fat. Okay, I'll admit the water
here is hard, but that signifies nothing! Aerated drinks, such as
those he's shown a preference for, are but concentrated sugar and
carbon dioxide! (I am very seriously considering writing a character
analysis about him as we used to in school about characters in plays!)
Getting back to the topic at hand, he buys these not in large bottles
but in small plastic tetra-packs and tin cans. When asked what he does
with these, he once said that he keeps them after use and uses them to
drink from rather than using large bottles. That is something that not
just I but several others would disapprove of, and on various
levels. In any case, he does not do what he says he does as you would
have expected. He disposes of them as I described above.


## I only let what I want inside my house {#i-only-let-what-i-want-inside-my-house}

Knowing that a long line of interns and volunteers have been
conducting a project on a lizard species here, he often used to ask me
if any of them would like to catch lizards in his house, since their
job was to catch lizards anyway. Attempts at explaining that the
species of lizard that they study is so vastly different are futile as
that doesn't mean anything to him. Although this is said lightly, this
tendency of his is of interest and I may write of it elsewhere.  His
descriptions of the menace cause by the lizards is often very
humorous.

> These lizards, no, they put their dung everywhere.

What dung? I ask, seriously wondering what on earth he's talking
about.

> _Arre yaar_! Their shit!

I don't bother any further. I don't understand what those lizards have
done to him that he hasn't himself! It turned out that, as I found out
much later, he had bought a toy gun that actually shot at fairly high
speeds small plastic balls and a laser pointer with which he used to
accurately shoot these house lizards to death. When someone is
stubborn and hell-bent on doing something so ridiculously elaborate,
I've found out that, more often than not, its best to let them do as
they wish.

---

Amphibians are the other unwelcome guests to his house. Toads that
usually migrate towards anywhere that they get more food, such as
under a light source, migrate to the top of the stairs to his door
where he keeps his shoes. Somehow, these toads climb into his shoes
and stay there until he accidentally touches them while putting on his
shoes. Once this has happened, he empties the shoe over the stairs,
dropping the toad a whole story down. Once he has worn the shoes, he
then picks up a bamboo stick (which I've seen him use only in the way
mentioned) and on finding the toad nails it to a concrete or stone
surface with the stick and crushes it.  You can almost guess his
answer when asked what he's doing that for:

> _Arre_ this frog is simply coming into my shoe. I will teach it not to
> do it again.

How can you teach a toad (not a frog) by crushing it?

> _Arre_ if I hit it, it will not come back.

Yeah, well, I can't argue with that logic can I?


## Consequences of this mindset {#consequences-of-this-mindset}

A whole country thinking this way only makes things harder for
implementing sustainable policy. Even the best of governmental policy
if not understood by the people, comes to no good. What the best
school in the country has failed to do is to educate such people about
such issues and that definitely doesn't sound good. I do not intend to
pin the blame on any one, least of all the school, but it is these
antisocial elements that spread negative influence and why this
mindset still prevails, as did happen with the _Jallikattu_
protests. What I have described here is a limited perspective of the
bigger issue at hand, the same that probably took the _Jallikattu_
protests forward to the large scale that it achieved. That I will be
talking about in another article.  Indiscriminate killing of wildlife,
damaging wildlife irreversibly alters the interactions between species
which are a fundamental requirement of ecosystem maintenance. Hence
sustainability goes out of the window as soon as one meddles with
other life forms. That is not saying much because human existence
today already causes so much interference with pre-existing life
forms. It can hardy get worse, and this I say not in a positive
way. If anything, human should strive to reduce unnecessary contact
with wildlife that can potentially damage it.  That was about the
effects of direct interference. Improper waste management,
unsustainable practices and other such contribute to indirect
effects. The indirect effects have already caused significant
damage. If it isn't realised immediately, as should the issue of
global warming (which the world's biggest superpower ignores so
conveniently) it is inevitable that the apocalypse will occur. The
only cure to this is a scientific or methodical approach to thought
which I have written about in the first part of the essay on
evolution.  I may have missed our several aspect so these issues and
probably even some important ones. I hope to cover those in the other
articles that should be up later.
