#+HUGO_BASE_DIR: ../../

#+seq_todo: TODO DRAFT | DONE
#+options: creator:t
#+startup: overview

#+title: peregrinator's blog source
#+author: peregrinator

* Posts
** DRAFT Hello, world?                                            :intro:about:
CLOSED: [2022-11-21]
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_HUGO_BUNDLE: introduction
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: index
:EXPORT_HUGO_AUTO_SET_LASTMOD: t
:EXPORT_HUGO_CUSTOM_FRONT_MATTER: :toc false
:END:

I'm a 27 year old, non-binary, neurodivergent cat supremacist that
sometimes cosplays as an ecologist. I'm big on F(L)OSS and currently
run a [[https://voidlinux.org][Void Linux]] installation with a manually compiled version of
Emacs 29. I also play the guitar, typically listen to metal and try to
make my own music occasionally. I use [[https://ardour.org][Ardour 7.0]] for audio production
and hope to get started with the [[https://sonic-pi.net][Sonic Pi]] as both a standalone synth
as well as a synth for instruments I don't physically play for what
I've been working on.

** DONE A dark side to pets                    :pets:responsible_pet_ownership:
CLOSED: [2016-01-15]
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_HUGO_BUNDLE: a-dark-side-to-pets
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: index
:EXPORT_HUGO_CUSTOM_FRONT_MATTER: :series "Responsible Pet Ownership"
:EXPORT_HUGO_AUTO_SET_LASTMOD: t
:END:

We all love cats, but are they really what we believe them to be? A
common perception is that cats are lazy animals and prefer sleeping
though most of the day. But has anyone actually seen a cat hunt? Their
feline agility coupled with a primal necessity to kill make for an
extremely dangerous animal to keep.

Have any of you wondered what feral cats and many domestic cats do at
night? Take a look at the leopard. Many of you would have read Jim
Corbett's stories. One particular book comes to mind: 'The Man-eating
Leopard of Rudraprayag'. It's a fairly small book that describes a
leopard whose usual haunts were the villages around Rudraprayag in
what is now Uttarakhand, Northern India. The man-eater was notorious
for having killed over a hundred and twenty-five people in its
"career" as Corbett describes it. What is most interesting about the
kills was that not a single one took place in daylight. Felids are
nocturnal and hence most of the hunting takes place in the
dark. Similarly, most feral and domesticated cats are active at night
and that's when most of the hunting happens.

[[/images/20161201_goose_catsnake.jpg][file:/images/20161201_goose_catsnake.jpg]]

On the first of December 2016, I was sitting at home in. My father
said something which at first I ignored. Then, realising that he'd
said Goose (my cat) was killing a snake. I rushed out to see that a
small brown snake was dangling from Goose's mouth and was struggling
to escape. Goose then dropped it and picked it up to get a better
grip. It was my mother who suggested I save the snake. It took me a
while to get to my senses by which time Goose had inflicted a deep cut
into the snake's body. I tried pulling Goose away but was a little
worried about getting scratched and bitten. It was futile and Goose
was surprisingly intensely focused (which he usually is not) and
intent on devouring the ophidian. I asked my mother to get some food
for him from the kitchen while I tried to pull him away. It was only
after cutting the snake in half that he finally let go. There was
nothing left to be done and I kept the corpse aside to identify.

What happened while trying to identify it is another story for another
day I found out that it was a Yellow-Green Cat Snake (/Boiga
flaviviridis/ Vogel and Ganesh, 2013). Goose, by then, has eaten the
rear half of the cat snake and disappeared. But what surprised me the
most was that I didn't know of this side of Goose or of his predatory
instincts as well as I thought I did. I was, of course, furious at the
fact that he'd killed a snake, but then what next? Should I continue
feeding him?


*** A docile cat?

Goose was brought up by my neighbours. He was something of a small guy
and smaller than most of the other cats around. He was fed rice and
milk with occasional curds but never meat. He was very social and
friendly and had no issues with being petted. He was so friendly that
he would climb up onto our laps and sleep. Since he was isolated from
his mother, who typically would have taught him all the necessary
skills to hunt, and also seemed to only sleep all day, I began to
think he couldn't hunt and get the right nutrition to grow up. I was
convinced of this when he showed absolutely no interest in birds on
the ground or in low bushes. Lizards, insects, and spiders were bold
in his presence because he just refused to go after them. I usually
had to wave spiders in his face for him to get interested in them, and
even then he was a clumsy hunter. And for nearly 2 years I was
convinced that Goose was the ideal pet. I had, of course, heard of
feral cats hunting and killing, just for the joy of it, wild rodents,
birds, lizards, and snakes. One of my friends did mention observing a
full grown cat taking on a cobra. But Goose was different.

Seeing Goose kill the snake came as a nasty surprise to me. Even now
as I write this I am unable to wrap my head around the irony of a cat
killing a cat snake. Some days later my father told me that he'd seen
Goose carrying a large mouse, and as usual, he "showed off" his
(s)kill by dropping it at the doorstep.


*** Hunting, but it doesn't stop there

For three reasons, cats and dogs are more successful at establishing
themselves over native predators. Cats are protected from disease, not
limited by the availability of prey, and least of all limited in
numbers by territoriality. They are also immensely successful in
places like islands and other naturally predator-free landscapes,
where native wildlife has close to no adaptations to help avoid
becoming prey.

Patterns of cats hunting wildlife have been well documented. In the
United States itself, some 12.3 billion mammals and 2.4 billion birds
are lost to free ranging pets and feral cats every year. There have
been innumerable instances of this behaviour in cats from around the
world, and animal protection societies frequently suggest keeping cats
locked indoors at night or when most wild animals are active (see
references for more). Naturalists and conservationists all over the
world urge pet keepers to stay informed of their pet's movements and
ensure that they are well fed.

Other issues with free-ranging carnivorous animals are that they carry
vastly novel diseases that wild animals they come in close contact
with are unlikely to have been exposed to. These typically transmit
from humans and other domestic animals such as cattle. Fragmented
forest patches often have an inadequate reserves of food for the
wildlife in it. Animals such as elephants are forced out and to use
the food grown in crops such as banana plantations and
sugarcane. Carnivores, due to lack of food venture into human
habitation for food and are forced to interact with these feral
animals, from which the diseases are more easily obtained. With
prevalent fragmentation of forests, wild animals, especially those
that live in closed social groups such as macaques and Wild Dogs, get
restricted to fragments and hence are more susceptible to epidemics of
these diseases. Added to this, certain carnivorous cat species that
have very low genetic diversity, can suffer a lot of damage with the
added impact of these introduced diseases. Asiatic lions in Gir are a
single isolated population and even a few lions contracting something
like canine distemper could potentially wipe out the entire
population.

Stray and feral dogs that are a very common sight in cities and towns
not only pose a health hazard to humans by spreading rabies and other
diseases but also attack and kill children. Adults aren't spared from
brutal attacks either. Dogs are known to regularly hunt Black-naped
Hares and other small mammals. Stray dogs at the IIT Madras campus
have been reported to hunt Spotted Deer and on occasion even the
endangered Blackbuck. Despite measures taken to capture and relocate
dogs from inside the campus, a large number of them are hard to catch
and remain in the wilderness. Regardless of such efforts, stray dogs
continue to migrate in and out of such places and there's almost no
shortage of them at any given point of time.

Islands are prime examples for cats hunting a species to
extinction. The best known example of this is the Stephens Island
Wren. The case of the Rockwren was very similar to that of the dodo in
the sense that they were found only on a small island. There was a
light-house on that island and three keepers lived on the island with
their families and a tutor for their children. One or more cats were
kept by these families and a cat, known as Tibbles, was notorious for
having hunted in its career all the endemic Stephens Island Wren
(/Traversia lyalli/). It is said that the bird went extinct,
while it was being discovered for the first time by one of the keepers
of the lighthouse. Although this may not be the complete story, it
serves as an example of how invasive feral carnivores can destroy
native ecosystems. As I have mentioned earlier this isn't the complete
story. I will be writing more about this particular case in a later
article.

New Zealand is also home to a very unique series of reptiles not found
anywhere around the globe. Several species have gone extinct in the
few thousand years it has been occupied by human beings. There was
another cat in whose 17 years of life, it hunted over 558 recorded
animals of which 223 were birds. Although the birds survived, the cat
is known to have exterminated all the rabbits which it later seemed to
prefer. It, however, must be noted that it was not merely cats that
were involved in these extinctions but also household pests that
accompanied humans onto the islands that played a crucial role.

*** Last words: responsible pet ownership

What next? I think the key point to be kept in mind here is
responsible pet ownership. This is a discussion riddled in ambiguous
ethical principles and accountability is almost never
considered. Legal restrictions and various problematic policies on
dealing with the issue make it harder to address. I've tried to
discuss this aspect of the issue in another post.
** DONE Pets, put in context                 :pets:responsible_pet_ownership:
CLOSED: [2017-06-15]
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_HUGO_BUNDLE: pets-put-in-context
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: index
:EXPORT_HUGO_CUSTOM_FRONT_MATTER: :series "Responsible Pet Ownership"
:EXPORT_HUGO_AUTO_SET_LASTMOD: t
:END:

Pets and feral animals have been shown to cause great amounts of
destruction to native wildlife, but since very little research has
been done in that field, things remain unclear. Most of the cases
where the extreme case of extinction occurred were on islands, but
this does not indicate that the mainland is safe from this. A lack of
visible evidence, either scientific or not, /does not/ indicate
that such animals are not killing wildlife regularly, or that the
consequences of having them around are negligible. There are several
signs that some areas may be more vulnerable to the effects of
invasive animals than others.


*** Introduction

For those of you that haven't read my [[file:/posts/2016/01/a-dark-side-to-pets/][earlier article]] on the issues
with keeping free ranging pets and having stray carnivores, I would
recommend going through it first although it is not an absolute
necessity to understand the concepts explained here. Also, some
evolutionary concepts are dealt with so for a better understand
consider going through my articles on evolution as well. Note that
this is a clarification to those who are not convinced of the issues
brought to light in the older article. I will also explain the issues
associated with the introduction of non-carnivorous pets in a
/previously undisturbed/ environment. The driving factor behind
my writing this article was conversations with people not familiar
with the scientific way of thought that made me realise that unless
the complete issues are spelled out, the ideas will not be
understood. Additionally, another snake was nearly killed recently by
an adopted feral cat (refer to my older article for the details of the
snake killed). It must also be noted here that pets not only include
cats and dogs but also livestock such a cows, goats, sheep and
buffaloes.

The consequences of the introduction of animals into an area
previously unexposed to it can be very subtle for the lay mind to
comprehend since the interactions between humans and the environment
are virtually ignored. Inter-connectedness is the quintessence of
ecology without which none of its theories can be justified. Similar
are the consequences of introducing alien plant species (alien here
refers to those species from often from other continents, but not
necessarily always so) or with disease. /Lantana camara/ was
introduced in India a couple of hundred years earlier and today it has
replaced the understory in most of the peninsular dry deciduous
forests and occupied a great portion of the arid scrub jungles. It,
however, cannot be easily removed (as is with the case of free ranging
pets and strays) as now several other animals and plants have
developed certain crucial interactions with /Lantana/. Removal
of /Lantana/ has been largely unsuccessful for various reasons,
which is atleast in this case advantageous but it may not be the case
always.

What I wish to make clear through the course of this essay is that
human intervention in the functioning of the Earth's environment can
no longer be ignored since human presence has grown disproportionately
in the last few thousand years. This means that the repercussions of
even growing food for even a tenth of the current population are so
great that it could drive several species of native wildlife extinct.


*** Isolation in its various forms

What in essence happens when a ecosystem, previously unexposed to a
certain kind of animal or plant, is suddenly introduced with an alien
species? Tribal communities living in isolation were exposed to
disease such as common cold and other such diseases by visiting people
from modern society which spread rapidly (examples of which are seen
in the Jarawas and explained in Jared Diamond's /Guns, Germs and
Steel/). But note that this is a closed environment. Such tribals
typically live outside cities with limited interaction to the outside
world. The consequences of the introduction of an alien species is
typically the same in several cases. Unprepared and susceptible, at
the mercy of the new species, most are affected, usually
adversely. This must is to be kept in mind albeit it should also be
adverted to the fact that this doesn't occur in all cases.

In talking about carnivorous pets in my last article, I got too
carried away by them and failed to touch on the consequences of
herbivorous “pets” on undisturbed ecosystems, as was pointed out in
one of the comments. What should one expect with free ranging
herbivores such as cows and other livestock in such a scenario?
Numbers of individuals introduced here are insignificant since the
“lethal dose” of number of these animals will in any case be attained
over a short period of time. Herds of goats and cows feed over large
tracts of grass covered areas which is usually unable to regenerate
due to their continuous onslaught. The effects are naturally amplified
(given the additional absence of carnivores) in the case of smaller
herbivores such as rabbits and hares which breed rapidly and clear
large stretches of grassland. Uncontrolled grazing results in the
denudation of natural forest in its various forms and hence native
herbivores are the first hit. Since the native fauna and flora
maintained an equilibrium between plant consumption and animal
population, this is now disrupted.

So when do the effects of introduced species get felt? I have already
suggested that extinctions due to introduced species has a high
prevalence in the case of islands. What about islands is so peculiar?
I will return to these questions a little later in the essay. A stable
ecosystem is one where the population of each species is regulated or
maintained in spite of predation, herbivory and other such
interactions. That is to say that if a certain number of (for example)
a bird species are killed each year, that species continues to survive
because over time new individuals replace those lost. The predators
continually switch over to alternate food sources and hence the
pressure on the prey reduces (from the constant high pressure offered
by specialist predators, which are typically rare in the wild). This
is usually seen if the ecosystem is spread over a large area with a
sufficiently large population of prey that is distributed through the
area, allowing movement of populations across the area. If the
predator species kill too many individuals of that bird species, the
predators will have nothing to feed on and hence will die out with the
bird population, but this extreme is quite rare. This is usually
avoided and such an equilibrium is in all cases maintained by varying
numbers of predator and prey. The same is the case with plant species
and herbivores. Such plasticity exists in all ecosystems.

Islands are continually changing in their species composition. Rather
than having an equilibrium between populations of species, there is a
balance between extinctions (or to be more precise extirpations) and
immigrations. A limited availability of resources allows only a small
number of individuals to reside on it (excesses are not trimmed off
and eventually drive the species extinct). The number of species also
is considerably lower than on the corresponding mainland. Combined,
the two mentioned factors allow a very low number of species,
represented by a very small population inhabiting the island. Hence,
local extinctions are frequent and seemingly causeless, although minor
changes of any aspect are the cause. The same is the case with
fragmented forests and “islands” on the mainland. Once extinction
occurs, there is a greater likelihood of “immigrating” species to
establish themselves. This fragile state of island biodiversity
prevents the continuity of life once an invasive species is introduced
since minor changes can disrupt the species composition. In addition,
islands are more likely to have species that although might have
evolved from those of the mainland, are considerably different and
hence endemic. The extirpation (or extinction) of a species implies
that the species that comes in its place could be altogether
different, hence endemics and in most cases even other species lost on
an island are lost forever. Island fauna is also tame since exposures
to predators are typically lacking due to the absence of such a
selection pressure.

Isolation also can be created by the construction of man-made
barriers, especially in the case of plants and herpetofauna and other
fauna with limited mobility. Roads, canals and other such structures
limits further their mobility. Other more subtle selective pressures
applied could also play a role in this.

Some form of isolation that is seen in cases where species have been
introduced, plays an important role. Islands are isolated since they
are less easily accessible to reptiles, amphibians and most plants
from almost anywhere else. Plants, as already suggested cannot bear
the brunt of the advance of herbivores unlike animals which tend to,
over time, develop behavioural adaptations. There are however more
complex forms of isolation, even on the mainland, explained below.


*** Consequences of invasion

Island fauna, as mentioned above, is tame and hence introduced
predators (such as cats and dogs) can approach them without having to
expend energy in stalking and other forms of subtlety. In the case of
flora, islands are as susceptible to denudation as the mainland as
plants (unlike animals) are not as dynamic and cannot survive the
onslaught of a rapidly growing population of herbivores. Forest
fragmentation ensues in part due to overgrazing by livestock and the
removal of forest cover to meet food requirements with agriculture.

As a result of forest fragmentation, an original population of a
species specific to that forest type, becomes isolated in these
pockets. In most cases, likely including that of birds, the
individuals from each region cannot or do not migrate to others due to
territorial boundaries. The consequence is small unstable populations
of species that are extremely susceptible to [[https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/extirpate][extirpation]] for a variety
of reasons. Inbreeding causes loss of genetic diversity and
consequently deleterious mutations accumulate causing lower likelihood
of survival; loss of genetic variation also increases the risk of
extirpation by [[https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/zoonosis][zoonotic]] disease, which has been shown to have a
greater prevalence in the fauna inhabiting fragmented forests even
otherwise, such as in the case of Lion-tailed Macaques (/Macaca
silenus/) and Civets in the Western Ghats (and additionally other
mammal species); and predation itself can very likely wipe out the
small population, the risks of which are greatly increased by
introduced (typically animal) species which are either better adapted
to hunting, or through competition for limited food resources.

Cows and other livestock are generally kept in large groups such that
the yield of milk will be sufficient to not only satisfy individual
and family needs but for its use as a commercialized source of
livelihood. The cattle has to be provided not just dry feed but need
fresh fodder for which a good source is grass in scrub jungles and
meadows, and several shrubs in the same and other types of
forest. These are readily used. As sensible as this may sound, large
numbers of cattle are detrimental to the forest ecosystem. Selective
feeding on plants, that is subsidised from predation by human
intervention can result in the formation of an imbalanced ecosystem:
native herbivores lose out on vital food resources and hence drop in
numbers as a result of which predators are affected. This leads to a
more permanent loss of forest cover in part since less faeces in the
soil implies less fertility and hence native plant species don't
survive and disperse. The paucity of plants adversely affects bees,
other pollinators on which birds and some animals feed, and affects
native herbivore populations which again impacts the predators. This
cycle repeats itself several times to leave either small fragments of
forest or none at all and as a result not one but several species of
biota is impacted.

Disease of animals, known as zoonotic disease, are on the rise as a
result of close interaction of wildlife and humans. Diseases of urban
and man-made origin are now prevalent in several feral and domestic
animals. With the high incidence of these animals entering native
forests, these diseases very likely will be transmitted to wildlife
and being unequipped to deal with such, a large number of individuals
will be lost. Additionally, forest fragmentation by human activities
reduces wildlife to even smaller groups of individuals that face a
greater likelihood of contracting zoonotic diseases from nearby human
settlements. Smaller populations that have limited interaction with
each other are more susceptible to disease. Diseases of livestock such
as [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rinderpest][rinderpest]] are known to affect not only wild bovine species but
reportedly affect cervines (i.e. Deer) and other related wildlife.

Species, selectively impacted by disease or predation, can cause
additionally complications. Disease of carnivores resulting in their
extermination causes a boom in herbivore populations which as a result
of overgrazing leads to loss of habitat. A cascade of extinctions are
likely to follow: this loss of food sources for herbivores can be
detrimental to other herbivores which would have to resort to
migration to survive and would otherwise perish. Any predatorial
species dependent on these animals would also suffer. A similar result
can occur by the loss of herbivores to disease or predation: with less
fertile faeces, lowered fertility reduces the dispersal of trees or
selectively propagates certain species which may or may not be
beneficial to the ecosystem; the predators due to a lack of prey die
out.


*** Solutions

Possible ways feral animals can be controlled are few: culling and
sterilisation are possibly the most effective and easily implemented,
although these are quite inhumane. Rescue agencies in cities catch and
tend to such animals and usually give the animals out as pets
later. This could be a more sensible and humane method although
excesses have to be dealt with rapidly. Sterilization might be in the
longer run more effective. Keeping domestic and adopted cats indoors
at all times is the possibly the only way their killing of wildlife
can be prevented. Dealing with cattle in India is further complicated
by the fact that cows are considered sacred. I shall not advocate any
measure to deal with cattle for this reason (although probably I will
write about this issue later).

It now is apparent that these issues have to be better studied and
areas that face greater risks have to be identified. Measures taken
will have to be specific to those areas and have to be implemented
rapidly without fail.
** DONE Misunderstanding evolution                                :evolution:
CLOSED: [2017-02-25]
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_HUGO_BUNDLE: misunderstanding-evolution
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: index
:EXPORT_HUGO_CUSTOM_FRONT_MATTER: :series "Evolution Theory"
:EXPORT_HUGO_AUTO_SET_LASTMOD: t
:END:

Who does really understand evolution? (Wait, is it even true?!) Even
if it is, who really has the better idea? What the hell did Darwin
really do on the /Beagle/? Well, I have some answers. In this
two-part essay, I will be discussing how to understand evolution as a
concept and will be touching upon the babble behind the scenes. This
part is a general background to the concept of evolution, dealing with
the "story" behind it rather than the concepts themselves. The second
part will deal with the theories of evolution and their finer
aspects.


*** Introduction

When I was in school, I found that a lot of the concepts that I
thought I understood were actually more complicated. Obviously, I had
to wait till the exams to realise this. But then, I figured that if I
could understand what went wrong at that time, anyone could, and
additionally prepare in such a way that they really understand the
concept as a whole, in all its finer aspects. What hampers such
precise understanding of facts is assumptions and
expectations. Spiritual predispositions and other such forces tend to
cloud judgement and, hence, come in the way of logical thought. The
other most significant antagonist of scientific thought is (and I
don't mean the kind of thought that religious people lack!) the
undoubting faith in whatever is told. The inability to question and be
skeptical. Now, this might sound weird. It certainly did feel weird
when I realised this. But I believe that by the end of this essay, it
will be well established that skepticism is the key element to
understanding anything. Please note, I intend no animosity towards
spirituality and any comments made in this essay are purely
light-hearted.


*** Setting the stage

Most readers would have come across textbooks that describe evolution
with the usual theories and examples. There is Lamarck's theory, which
in most opinions, is outdated and eclipsed by the more robust and
logical Darwinian ideas. Then come the modern theories of Morgan and
others who using Mendel's [then] recently rediscovered ideas, further
complicated things. Well, brush all those aside! Throw them out of
your head! Science is also about starting afresh once things get
muddled up!


*** What are we talking about?

The misconceptions that are associated with evolution are what the
mind has to consciously rid itself off. Why these are present in the
first place is another topic altogether which I'm afraid I can't talk
about (since it just isn't my cup of tea, yet!) and involves
understanding the functioning of the mind. Suffice it to say that the
mind tends to simplify facts and hence colour the explanation that one
receives when trying to understand a concept. The end result is an
inaccurate understanding of concepts which a good skeptic sees through
when examined finely. These misconceptions I will lay bare here
and it must be noted that only once these are understood will the
concepts I explain make sense.

**** 1. Time frames

The underlying processes of evolution have been observed to act over
great expanses of time. The study of fossils (Palaeontology) has had a
very important role to play in the development of evolution as a
concept. Darwin's observations of fossils apart by millions of
years played a crucial role in his understanding of his own
concepts. Fossils are by no means easily found and this highlights the
fact that they are formed in very rare cases. This inherently implies
the period in between formation of two fossils of any kind is
great. In addition to this, their discovery is fraught with
complications that for the purposes of this essay needn't be
elaborated. The end result: fossils found are from times so wide apart
that any changes seem obvious.

Those of you that have seen the film /The Man from Earth/, would have an
idea as to what (spoiler alert!!) someone who lived for fourteen
thousand years would have experienced in a life so long. But the
common man would find it challenging to comprehend even those time
scales involved. Although I could go on about timescales, I'd rather
get to the main idea of the talk earlier so I'll share a much-clichéd
analogy to make this concept clear.

#+begin_quote
If you represent the Earth’s lifetime by a single year, say from
January when it was made to December, the 21st-century would be a
quarter of a second in June – a tiny fraction of the year. But even in
this concertinaed cosmic perspective, our century is very, very
special: the first when humans can change themselves and their home
planet….

… let’s suppose some aliens had been watching our pale blue dot in the
cosmos from afar, not just for 40 years, but for the entire 4.5
billion-year history of our Earth. What would they have seen? Over
nearly all that immense time, Earth’s appearance would have changed
very gradually.The only abrupt worldwide change would have been major
asteroid impacts or volcanic super-eruptions. Apart from those brief
traumas, nothing happens suddenly.

The continental landmasses drifted around. Ice cover waxed and
waned. Successions of new species emerged, evolved and became
extinct. But in just a tiny sliver of the Earth’s history, the last
one-millionth part, a few thousand years, the patterns of vegetation
altered much faster than before. This signaled the start of
agriculture.Change has accelerated as human populations rose. Then
other things happened even more abruptly. Within just 50 years —
that’s one hundredth of one millionth of the Earth’s age — the amount
of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere started to rise, and ominously
fast…
#+end_quote

This explanation illustrates the time periods that have shaped
the earth. Human presence graced the earth for so short a period that
what we see in the world today is exceedingly limited. Those are the
timescales that evolution acts over.

**** 2. Generational factors

A very frequently misunderstood aspect of evolution is the strata of
organisms evolution affects. This is closely linked to the first
miscalculation of time frames as you shall see.

The most common idea the people have is that evolution occurs in the
individual. The "learnings" of one individual are directly transferred
to their offspring. This is anything but true. Evolution happens over
several generations of individuals. And evolution is more of a
consequence of other changes; individuals of a population don't change
as a result of evolution. Their offspring accumulate changes over
generations that lead to the evolution of a species.

**** 3. Evolution is /not/ progress

Although there might be evidence of better /adaptation/ to certain
environmental factors, there is *no* /progress/ that
occurs as a result of evolution. The whole theory that man is the most
advanced being on this planet isn't entirely true. Evidences of
alternative forms of intelligence exist in other life forms, and
although these may not be on par with /intelligence/ as defined by a
human, they certainly are nearly as good in their own way. I won't say
any more about this because this isn't the point I'm trying to make in
any case.

Evolution is caused by selective survival of individuals
/better capable/ of surviving in a very specific environment. This only
means that the animal is better capable of surviving in that
environment than say others of its original population. It must be
noted that this I've only given as a comparison. The two would
interact only if members of the original population still survive, and
if they co-occur or are sympatric (in scientific terms), the added
constraint of limited resources (amongst other factors) would result
in the extermination of the lesser able (that is members of the
original population). The so-called "struggle for life" is only
metaphorical; animals don't necessarily fight each other.

**** 4. When evolution occurred

Evolution has occurred in the past, is occurring now, and will
continue to occur in the future. This is commonly confounded by the
belief that evolution has occurred and the animals and plants seen
today are the final products of all evolution that has ever
occurred. This gives evolution a "creational" position, more or less
equal to "God". And that is where science differs from God!

Evolution occurs continually because there some parts of the
environment that continually change and to "keep up" with those,
certain individuals of populations are selected out. This also affects
all species on earth. The same species that we see today may not
exist in the future.

**** 5. Evolution as a fact

If you think the theories of evolution are fact, that's great! Only
they're not. Like all good theories in science, these can only
something that can be shown to be true in very specific cases, with
/some amount of certainty/ (yes, the theories have not been proven as a
fact /yet/, if you haven't got that already!). As they say in science, a
good theory is one that stands the test of time and
experimentation. Fortunately, for you believers out there,
evolutionary theory has stood the test of time so far. But remember,
that this doesn't give any reason to doubt the theory. The theories of
evolution make clear many of the "unexplainable" happenings of the
world. I will not be discussing that aspect since I believe that can
be done once you've understood the concept of evolution itself.


*** Darwin's influences

Before getting to the theory itself, I feel it would be of good use to
look at the story of Darwin and evolutionary theory. But let me get
one thing clear before I start with even this: the "Darwinian" theory
of evolution was not Darwin's own. He was too dull-witted to think up
the whole thing himself. What he effectively did was compile
everything at hand and publish it. Even the idea that he should do
this was not his own! It might make more sense, hence, to think of
this as the people or ideas that made him sure enough to write about
it.</p> Darwin was actually quite imperceptive. His was a very mundane
life and although he had planned on studying medicine, he switched
over to the cloth and learned the scriptures instead and this might
have played an important role in shaping his thought. He had access to
several books in the library and even read some "prohibited" books
(those books which the clergy thought would endanger their popularity
by getting people interested in science). One such was the /Principles
of Geology/.

Of course, there are the well-known books that he
carried with him on the voyage of the HMS /Beagle/: John
Milton's /Paradise Lost/ and Charles Lyell's /Principles of Geology/. Very
simply, the graphic descriptions of living creatures and the
fascination for them expressed in /Paradise Lost/ and the /Principles of
Geology/ got him thinking about world changing changes that take place
over periods of large amounts of time.

Another major influence may have been his grandfather himself. Erasmus
Darwin was a physician and also a poet amongst several other
things. In his poems (/The Loves of the Plants/ and /The Temple of
Nature/, it is said that there are mentions of evolution in a similar
capacity to what Darwin spoke of in his /Origin/. Darwin's own teacher,
Robert Edmond Grant was said to have purported the same theory and had
been considered "heretic" by Darwin and others of that time. Although
Grant had recieved fame worldwide for his other work, his theory
brought down upon him disdain.

So carrying Milton and Lyell, Darwin finally left on the voyage of the
/Beagle/, at the crisp age of 22, as an unpaid gentleman's companion
(I'm sorry but that sounds a lot worse than what it is intended to!)
to the [then] also young Captain Robert FitzRoy. It is suggested that
his predecessor on the /Beagle/ had committed suicide as a consequence
of "loneliness". I am told Darwin got to travel with the /Beagle/ only
because he had the right shape of the nose. Four years later, they
landed on the Galápagos Islands hoping to find of all things Giant
Tortoises to eat!  What happened next was history. Or rather, what
happened became history only after several years because Darwin was
dumb.
** DONE Hugo, Org and starting over at a new job                      :emacs:
CLOSED: [2022-12-05]
:PROPERTIES:
:EXPORT_HUGO_BUNDLE: hugo-org-and-starting-over-at-a-new-job
:EXPORT_FILE_NAME: index
:EXPORT_HUGO_AUTO_SET_LASTMOD: t
:EXPORT_HUGO_CUSTOM_FRONT_MATTER: :series "Blogging with Emacs"
:END:

I'd decided to give up on my free WordPress blog a while back, after
having watched a SystemCrafters [[https://youtu.be/AfkrzFodoNw][video]] on how to blog from Emacs (/d'oh/,
I just /have/ to do everything from Emacs). Of course, daviwil only
covered the basics of writing and exporting using Emacs' built-in
packages and later for deploying it on GitHub / Sourcehut pages. And
it took me a good year to get down to making the switch but apparently
moving to a new place for work is the motivation it required. It felt
like cheating to use Jekyll on GitHub and I wanted something that
could be deployed to a Sourcehut site easily too (Sourcehut blocks any
CDN-based CSS loaded into the site's HTML) and I wanted something
extremely minimal, like Drew Devault's [[https://dredevault.com/][blog]] but with even fewer
frills - no images anywhere except for if a blog post required
them. Looking at his blog source, however, made me realise that there
was a lot more to that minimalism than one could see.


*** Basic setup

This has come through fairly well, so far. I've got an [[/emacs/emacs-literate-configuration/#ox-hugo-since-the-go-org-keep-wrecking-up-links][org-capture
setup]] for this that links up every new entry captured into a master
posts file, adding all the relevant info.

#+begin_src emacs-lisp :tangle no

  (with-eval-after-load 'org-capture
            (defun org-hugo-new-subtree-post-capture-template ()
              "Returns `org-capture' template string for new Hugo post.
          See `org-capture-templates' for more information."
              (let* ((title (read-from-minibuffer "Post Title: ")) ;Prompt to enter the post title
                     (fname (org-hugo-slug title)))
                (mapconcat #'identity
                           `(
                             ,(concat "* TODO " title)
                             ":PROPERTIES:"
                             ,(concat ":EXPORT_HUGO_BUNDLE: " fname)
                             ":EXPORT_FILE_NAME: index"
                             ":EXPORT_HUGO_AUTO_SET_LASTMOD: t"
                             ":END:"
                             "%?\n")          ;Place the cursor here finally
                           "\n")))

            (add-to-list 'org-capture-templates
                '("h"                ;`org-capture' binding + h
                  "Hugo blog post"
                  entry
                  (file+olp "~/my_gits/brihadeesh.github.io/content-org/blog/posts.org" "Posts")
                  (function org-hugo-new-subtree-post-capture-template))))

#+end_src


Exporting to markdown (Org just doesn't have a good enough support
yet), tags and organisation of pages into bundles is handled by
[[https://ox-hugo.scripter.co][ox-hugo]], a wonderful package for Emacs written by Kaushal Modi
([[https:scripter.co][website]]). The header arguments in the capture template cover
everything. With Emacs's =.dir-locals.el= feature, a file of that name
in the home directory of the blog ensures every new entry or
modification into the master posts file gets auto-exported to markdown
on save. The contents are quite simple.


#+begin_src emacs-lisp :tangle no

  ;; ~/.dir-locals.el
  (("content-org/"
    . ((org-mode . ((eval . (org-hugo-auto-export-mode)))))))

#+end_src


With Emacs's Org mode, this posts file has subheadings under a
/Posts/ header, each of which is a blog post and is exported to a
sub-directory under =~/content/posts/= as a lone =index.md= keeping with
the page-bundle kind of organisation.

A =tree= run for the content directory shows:

#+begin_src sh :tangle no

  $ tree content
  content
  ├── about
  │   └── index.md
  ├── emacs
  │   └── index.md
  ├── emacs-literate-configuration
  │   └── index.md
  ├── _index.md
  ├── posts
  │   ├── a-dark-side-to-pets
  │   │   └── index.md
  │   ├── introduction
  │   │   └── index.md
  │   ├── misunderstanding-evolution
  │   │   └── index.md
  │   └── pets-put-in-context
  │       └── index.md
  └── publications
      └── index.md

#+end_src

where every sub-directory in the top-level directory has a page of its
own while the home-page is the sole =_index.md= in the same. What I've
got going feels a little hacky but I'll figure this out.


*** Automatic deployment

Hugo, being a static site generator, creates HTML exports into
=~/public= and this is what the site uses. All major git hosting
services have configurable CI/CD for deploying these to the domain and
they're run automatically if you have a specific file in either

1. the root directory of the repo for Sourcehut called =.build.yml=
2. =~/.github/workflows/= for GitHub called anything you want with a
   =.yml= extension.

Mine uses =github-pages= and it looks like this:

#+begin_src yaml

  name: github pages

  on:
    push:
      branches:
        - main  # Set a branch that will trigger a deployment
    pull_request:

  jobs:
    deploy:
      runs-on: ubuntu-latest
      steps:
        - uses: actions/checkout@v3
          with:
            submodules: true  # Fetch Hugo themes (true OR recursive)
            fetch-depth: 0    # Fetch all history for .GitInfo and .Lastmod

        - name: Setup Hugo
          uses: peaceiris/actions-hugo@v2
          with:
            hugo-version: 'latest'
            # extended: true

        - name: Build
          run: hugo --minify

        - name: Deploy
          uses: peaceiris/actions-gh-pages@v3
          if: github.ref == 'refs/heads/main'
          with:
            github_token: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}
            publish_dir: ./public

#+end_src


*** Issues

There's still a lot to fix

1. heading anchors on top-level pages are superfluous
2. maybe consider switching to a theme-agnostic setup like Drew's
3. get rid of unnecessary indentation like in the table of contents and headings
4. add anchors even to lower level headers
5. switch to a Sourcehut site (eventually and when I can afford it)


*** Further reading

This is but a blog post written, and edited, within half an hour so I
likely haven't covered a lot of important things. I'll add some links
to others' blog posts that discuss using this or documentation as I
come across them.

1. ox-hugo: [[https://ox-hugo.scripter.co][website]] and [[https://github.com/kaushalmodi/ox-hugo][GitHub]]
2. (alternatively) [[https://github.com/niklasfasching/go-org][go-org]], the native Org backend for Hugo
