+++
title = "A dark side to pets"
author = ["peregrinator"]
date = 2016-01-15T00:00:00+05:30
lastmod = 2022-11-24T12:34:39+05:30
tags = ["pets", "responsible-pet-ownership"]
draft = false
creator = "Emacs 29.0.50 (Org mode 9.5.5 + ox-hugo)"
series = "Responsible Pet Ownership"
+++

We all love cats, but are they really what we believe them to be? A
common perception is that cats are lazy animals and prefer sleeping
though most of the day. But has anyone actually seen a cat hunt? Their
feline agility coupled with a primal necessity to kill make for an
extremely dangerous animal to keep.

Have any of you wondered what feral cats and many domestic cats do at
night? Take a look at the leopard. Many of you would have read Jim
Corbett's stories. One particular book comes to mind: 'The Man-eating
Leopard of Rudraprayag'. It's a fairly small book that describes a
leopard whose usual haunts were the villages around Rudraprayag in
what is now Uttarakhand, Northern India. The man-eater was notorious
for having killed over a hundred and twenty-five people in its
"career" as Corbett describes it. What is most interesting about the
kills was that not a single one took place in daylight. Felids are
nocturnal and hence most of the hunting takes place in the
dark. Similarly, most feral and domesticated cats are active at night
and that's when most of the hunting happens.

{{< figure src="/images/20161201_goose_catsnake.jpg" link="/images/20161201_goose_catsnake.jpg" >}}

On the first of December 2016, I was sitting at home in. My father
said something which at first I ignored. Then, realising that he'd
said Goose (my cat) was killing a snake. I rushed out to see that a
small brown snake was dangling from Goose's mouth and was struggling
to escape. Goose then dropped it and picked it up to get a better
grip. It was my mother who suggested I save the snake. It took me a
while to get to my senses by which time Goose had inflicted a deep cut
into the snake's body. I tried pulling Goose away but was a little
worried about getting scratched and bitten. It was futile and Goose
was surprisingly intensely focused (which he usually is not) and
intent on devouring the ophidian. I asked my mother to get some food
for him from the kitchen while I tried to pull him away. It was only
after cutting the snake in half that he finally let go. There was
nothing left to be done and I kept the corpse aside to identify.

What happened while trying to identify it is another story for another
day I found out that it was a Yellow-Green Cat Snake (_Boiga
flaviviridis_ Vogel and Ganesh, 2013). Goose, by then, has eaten the
rear half of the cat snake and disappeared. But what surprised me the
most was that I didn't know of this side of Goose or of his predatory
instincts as well as I thought I did. I was, of course, furious at the
fact that he'd killed a snake, but then what next? Should I continue
feeding him?


## A docile cat? {#a-docile-cat}

Goose was brought up by my neighbours. He was something of a small guy
and smaller than most of the other cats around. He was fed rice and
milk with occasional curds but never meat. He was very social and
friendly and had no issues with being petted. He was so friendly that
he would climb up onto our laps and sleep. Since he was isolated from
his mother, who typically would have taught him all the necessary
skills to hunt, and also seemed to only sleep all day, I began to
think he couldn't hunt and get the right nutrition to grow up. I was
convinced of this when he showed absolutely no interest in birds on
the ground or in low bushes. Lizards, insects, and spiders were bold
in his presence because he just refused to go after them. I usually
had to wave spiders in his face for him to get interested in them, and
even then he was a clumsy hunter. And for nearly 2 years I was
convinced that Goose was the ideal pet. I had, of course, heard of
feral cats hunting and killing, just for the joy of it, wild rodents,
birds, lizards, and snakes. One of my friends did mention observing a
full grown cat taking on a cobra. But Goose was different.

Seeing Goose kill the snake came as a nasty surprise to me. Even now
as I write this I am unable to wrap my head around the irony of a cat
killing a cat snake. Some days later my father told me that he'd seen
Goose carrying a large mouse, and as usual, he "showed off" his
(s)kill by dropping it at the doorstep.


## Hunting, but it doesn't stop there {#hunting-but-it-doesn-t-stop-there}

For three reasons, cats and dogs are more successful at establishing
themselves over native predators. Cats are protected from disease, not
limited by the availability of prey, and least of all limited in
numbers by territoriality. They are also immensely successful in
places like islands and other naturally predator-free landscapes,
where native wildlife has close to no adaptations to help avoid
becoming prey.

Patterns of cats hunting wildlife have been well documented. In the
United States itself, some 12.3 billion mammals and 2.4 billion birds
are lost to free ranging pets and feral cats every year. There have
been innumerable instances of this behaviour in cats from around the
world, and animal protection societies frequently suggest keeping cats
locked indoors at night or when most wild animals are active (see
references for more). Naturalists and conservationists all over the
world urge pet keepers to stay informed of their pet's movements and
ensure that they are well fed.

Other issues with free-ranging carnivorous animals are that they carry
vastly novel diseases that wild animals they come in close contact
with are unlikely to have been exposed to. These typically transmit
from humans and other domestic animals such as cattle. Fragmented
forest patches often have an inadequate reserves of food for the
wildlife in it. Animals such as elephants are forced out and to use
the food grown in crops such as banana plantations and
sugarcane. Carnivores, due to lack of food venture into human
habitation for food and are forced to interact with these feral
animals, from which the diseases are more easily obtained. With
prevalent fragmentation of forests, wild animals, especially those
that live in closed social groups such as macaques and Wild Dogs, get
restricted to fragments and hence are more susceptible to epidemics of
these diseases. Added to this, certain carnivorous cat species that
have very low genetic diversity, can suffer a lot of damage with the
added impact of these introduced diseases. Asiatic lions in Gir are a
single isolated population and even a few lions contracting something
like canine distemper could potentially wipe out the entire
population.

Stray and feral dogs that are a very common sight in cities and towns
not only pose a health hazard to humans by spreading rabies and other
diseases but also attack and kill children. Adults aren't spared from
brutal attacks either. Dogs are known to regularly hunt Black-naped
Hares and other small mammals. Stray dogs at the IIT Madras campus
have been reported to hunt Spotted Deer and on occasion even the
endangered Blackbuck. Despite measures taken to capture and relocate
dogs from inside the campus, a large number of them are hard to catch
and remain in the wilderness. Regardless of such efforts, stray dogs
continue to migrate in and out of such places and there's almost no
shortage of them at any given point of time.

Islands are prime examples for cats hunting a species to
extinction. The best known example of this is the Stephens Island
Wren. The case of the Rockwren was very similar to that of the dodo in
the sense that they were found only on a small island. There was a
light-house on that island and three keepers lived on the island with
their families and a tutor for their children. One or more cats were
kept by these families and a cat, known as Tibbles, was notorious for
having hunted in its career all the endemic Stephens Island Wren
(_Traversia lyalli_). It is said that the bird went extinct,
while it was being discovered for the first time by one of the keepers
of the lighthouse. Although this may not be the complete story, it
serves as an example of how invasive feral carnivores can destroy
native ecosystems. As I have mentioned earlier this isn't the complete
story. I will be writing more about this particular case in a later
article.

New Zealand is also home to a very unique series of reptiles not found
anywhere around the globe. Several species have gone extinct in the
few thousand years it has been occupied by human beings. There was
another cat in whose 17 years of life, it hunted over 558 recorded
animals of which 223 were birds. Although the birds survived, the cat
is known to have exterminated all the rabbits which it later seemed to
prefer. It, however, must be noted that it was not merely cats that
were involved in these extinctions but also household pests that
accompanied humans onto the islands that played a crucial role.


## Last words: responsible pet ownership {#last-words-responsible-pet-ownership}

What next? I think the key point to be kept in mind here is
responsible pet ownership. This is a discussion riddled in ambiguous
ethical principles and accountability is almost never
considered. Legal restrictions and various problematic policies on
dealing with the issue make it harder to address. I've tried to
discuss this aspect of the issue in another post.
